Here we report that large pupils predict fixations of the eye on low-salient locations. We recorded unconstrained eye movements of participants who viewed images, and found a clear inverse relationship between pupil size and the bottom-up visual saliency of fixated locations. This pattern held after controlling for a number of factors (luminance, saccade metrics, etc.) that might co-vary with both fixation saliency and pupil size.

We interpret this effect as showing that mental effort, reflected by a pupillary dilation [@Beatty1982;@KahnemanBeatty1966;@ZekveldKramerFesten2010], is required  for goal-driven behavior. More specifically, we suggest that mental effort is required to guide gaze towards parts of a visual scene that are relevant to the task at hand, but may not be very salient. In the absence of mental effort, the eyes tend to be captured by high-salient parts of the image, regardless of top-down goals. This finding can be linked to the concept of a priority map, which is a heatmap-like representation of the visual environment that guides the visual and ocolumotor systems [@BisleyGoldberg2010]. In this map, prioritized ('hot') objects are more likely to attract the eyes. One factor that determines how strongly an object is prioritized is bottom-up visual saliency [@IttiKochNiebur1998]: An object is prioritized if it is unique [@Theeuwes2010Acta], has suddenly appeared [@YantisJonides1984], is moving [@FranconeriSimons2003], or has a biologically relevant shape [@HansenHansen1988]. A person's top-down goals constitute a second factor: If you are looking for a friend in a crowded bar, people that somehow match the expected appearance of your friend are prioritized [@Wolfe1994;@Zelinsky2008]. Crucially, our results suggest that the contribution of top-down goals to the priority map depends on the amount of mental effort that is invested, and that this contribution can be tracked through pupillometry.

So far, spontaneous fluctuations in pupil size have received interest predominantly as an indicator of fatigue [e.g. @Geacintov1974]. In this context, the measure of interest is generally the average amplitude of these fluctuations (increased 'pupillary unrest' indicates fatigue), or average pupil size (smaller pupils indicate fatigue). Only recently have researchers begun to appreciate that the different periods within a fluctuation are meaningful as well [e.g., @Reimer2014]: A momentarily enlarged pupil corresponds to a brief moment of increased top-down control; A small pupil corresponds to increased bottom-up control. This was already foreseen by @Lowenstein1963Fatigue, who were among the first to systematically document fluctuations in resting-state pupil size, and conjectured that they reflected "successive waves of spontaneous arousal and following decline" (pp. 145). In line with this notion, and to our knowledge for the first time, the present study provides empirical support for the notion that spontaneous fluctuations in pupil size reflect fluctuations in top-down control of behavior.

For the purpose of disentangling bottom-up and top-down control, we have conveniently assumed that top-down goals necessarily drive the eyes towards low-salient locations, at least relative to a pure-saliency model of eye movements. This assumption is justified in the sense that eye movements are always guided to some extent by factors other than saliency [@TatlerBaddeleyGilchrist2005]. However, as mentioned in the introduction, this is also a simplification, because low-level saliency and top-down goals often overlap [@HendersonBrockmoleCastelhanoMack2007]: Important things tend to be salient. For example, although visual saliency is not relevant to a psychology student who performs a visual search task for course credit, it is very relevant to a rabbit that is on the lookout for predators. (Or for predators on the lookout for a rabbit.) The strongest negative relationship between pupil size and fixation saliency should be observed when saliency is the least relevant to top-down goals, i.e. when bottom-up and top-down behavior can be most easily distinguished. This is supported by the results from Exp. 2: We indeed observed the most pronounced relationship in the visual search task, in which there is an incentive to inspect also the low-salient parts of the image (see %FigExp12Saccade::c).

Our interpretation relies in large part on correlational data. Therefore, a legitimate question is whether different interpretations may not also account for the observed relationship between pupil size and fixation saliency. For example, one might conjecture that it takes additional effort to process low-salient parts of an image. This additional effort would be reflected in a dilation of the pupil, thus explaining the inverse relationship between pupil size and fixation saliency. This interpretation has the advantage that it readily explains why fixations on low-salient locations are followed, rather than preceded by a maximal dilation of the pupil (corresponding to the rightwards displacement of the peaks in %FigExp12Saccade and %FigExp3Window). However, we do not favor this interpretation for two main reasons. Firstly, in the current set of images, low-salient locations typically correspond to homogeneous regions of sky, water, and grass. These are not things that one expects to require particularly intensive cognitive processing. Secondly, if low-salient locations were indeed more difficult to process, we would expect fixation durations to be longer for low-salient than for high-salient locations [@Rayner1998], whereas we observe the opposite pattern for Experiments 1 and 3 (see Supplementary Methods). Therefore, although we acknowledge that different interpretations are possible, we favor an interpretation in terms of top-down control of eye movements: Fluctuations in mental effort modulate pupil size as well as the tendency for the eyes to be captured by saliency. We attribute the lag between pupil dilation and fixation saliency to the slowness of the pupillary response [@Beatty1982].

In summary, we have shown that dilated pupils predict fixations of the eye on low-salient locations. We have interpreted this as showing that mental effort, reflected through a dilation of the pupil, is required to guide the eyes towards objects that are relevant to current goals, and to reduce capture of the eyes by high-salient, but potentially irrelevant objects. More generally, our results suggest that spontaneous fluctuations in pupil size provide an on-line marker of goal-driven behavior.
