Behavior is guided to a considerable extent by the environment. Imagine that you are walking on a beach, when an approaching object grabs your attention [@FranconeriSimons2003]. You instinctively duck. Only later do you realize that the approaching object was a volleyball, and that your evasive maneuver has prevented a collision between the volleyball and your head. In situations such as these, behavior is based directly on salient properties of the environment (movement in this case) that automatically attract attention and elicit a response. This type of bottom-up control allows you to respond quickly and adaptively to dangers and opportunities in the environment.

But bottom-up control does not address all challenges of the environment equally well. Some situations require an in-depth, top-down analysis. For example, during driving you have to pay attention to things that are not salient, but are nevertheless very relevant [rear-view mirror, accelerometer, pedestrians, etc.; @Recarte2003]. Radiologists face a similar challenge when trying to identify rare and low-salient patterns in medical images [@Wolfe2010CurrBiol]. In neither of these situation will purely bottom-up control lead to the most adaptive behavior. Therefore, it is important to understand the relationship between bottom-up and top-down control. Which factors determine whether top-down or bottom-up control is dominant in a particular situation? And is it possible to track top-down control of behavior as it unfolds?

Van Zoest, Donk, and Theeuwes [-@Van+zoestDonkTheeuwes2004]+[; see also @DonkVan+zoest2008;@SieboldVan+zoestDonk2011;@Van+zoestDonk2005;@Van+zoestDonk2006;@Van+zoestDonk2008] addressed these questions by considering the time-course of visual selection. In one experiment [Exp. 4; @Van+zoestDonkTheeuwes2004], participants searched for a pre-specified target, which was a line-segment tilted 45° from a vertical orientation. The target was embedded in a field of homogeneous vertical line-segments. In addition, a distractor was presented, which was also a tilted line-segment. Crucially, the distractor was either more salient than the target, equally salient, or less salient. The results were clear-cut. Very fast eye movements (with a latency of less than 250 ms) overwhelmingly landed on the most salient object, regardless of whether it was the target or the distractor. In contrast, slow eye movements were usually directed at the target stimulus, regardless of the saliency of the distractor. This suggests that fast eye movements are driven primarily by bottom-up saliency, whereas slow eye movements are driven primarily by top-down goals.

The findings of Van Zoest and colleagues [-@Van+zoestDonkTheeuwes2004]+[; @DonkVan+zoest2008;@SieboldVan+zoestDonk2011;@Van+zoestDonk2005;@Van+zoestDonk2006;@Van+zoestDonk2008]+[; see also @GodijnTheeuwes2002] suggest that bottom-up control is dominant in guiding behavior 'early on' (i.e. for very fast eye movements and/ or immediately after a stimulus has appeared), but that top-down control becomes dominant later in time [@FoulshamUnderwood2007;@HendersonMalcolmSchandl2009]. What we propose here is that mental effort is required to exert top-down control. We use the term 'mental effort' in connection with the pupillometry literature [cf. @Beatty1982], but what we suggest specifically is the following. It is computationally non-trivial to evaluate the environment in terms of top-down goals, because goals are abstract concepts that cannot be mapped directly onto simple features [except for relatively simple goals, such as "looking for something red", cf. @Wolfe1994]. Presumably, this process takes time [cf. @Van+zoestDonkTheeuwes2004] and requires feedback loops between the early visual system and higher-order parietal and frontal areas [@LammeRoelfsema2000]. In this sense, mental effort is required, even though the computations that underlie top-down guidance may be wholly or partly implicit. Crucially, the amount of effort that we invest in a task fluctuates over time [@Reimer2014]. For example, participants in a search-for-Waldo experiment [e.g., @KleinMacinnes1999] may initially invest a lot of effort in trying to find Waldo. But over the course of many trials drowsiness sets in and effort wanes. At this point, participants let their eyes glaze over the image, from one conspicuous element to the next, still making eye movements, but no longer engaging the top-down goal to find Waldo. 

Mental effort, as we have described it above, is easily measured. As numerous studies have shown, the pupil faithfully dilates when you engage in a task that in some way requires mental effort [for recent reviews, see @LaengSiroisGredebäck2012;@SiroisBrisson2014]+[; for a classic, but remarkably insightful review, see @Loewenfeld1958]: The seminal studies by @KahnemanBeatty1966 have shown that the pupil dilates as a result of increased working memory load; Pupil dilation indicates the amount of effort invested in speech comprehension [@ZekveldKramerFesten2010]; More recently, and more directly related to the present study, it has been shown that pupillary dilation accompanies the detection of a target in a Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP) paradigm [@PriviteraRenningerCarneyKleinAguilar2010; see also @WolffScholz2014], that pupil-size indicates search difficulty in visual search [@PorterTrosciankoGilchrist2007] and multiple-object tracking [@Aln2014].

In the present experiments, we measured pupil size while participants viewed images and made unconstrained eye movements. We consistently found that the pupil was relatively dilated, reflecting increased mental effort [cf. @Beatty1982;@KahnemanBeatty1966;@ZekveldKramerFesten2010], when participants fixated on low-salient locations. The relationship between pupil size and fixation saliency was reduced when mental effort was invested in a secondary task, which suggests that there is a specific link between the effort invested in eye-movement guidance, and the tendency to fixate low-salient location. We interpret our findings as showing that top-down control in eye-movement guidance relies on mental effort. Without mental effort, or if effort is invested elsewhere, the eyes are captured by high-salient objects, regardless of whether these are relevant to current goals.
